# May 7, 6:18 am

Here is what I did yesterday. Are you paying attention to how your taxes are collected? Do you really trust the Mississippi Department of Revenue to collect these taxes uniformly and equally?
"Dear Ladies and Gentlemen:

I have been reviewing how our local businesses have been collecting the convention promotion tax from people in the city. I went shopping at Corner Market with my mom last week, and purchased some food from the deli counter. My mom selected some fried chicken and a bowl of dumplings. I selected a grilled pork chop. A nine percent tax was collected from the chicken and dumplings, but only a seven percent tax was collected for the pork chop. I called the Corner Market and was asked to contact their home office for details about how the tax is collected. On Friday, I got a chance to call the home office of Corner Market and inquire about how they collect our tax. I was informed that they are only collecting the special tax on the hot foods that are prepared for consumption, but they are not collecting the special tax on the cold foods they sell that are prepared for consumption. I was informed that certain foods, such as pasta salad, as well as my grilled pork chop would continue to be sold without the special tax being collected on those purchases. The person at the home office was unable to comment on how other businesses are collecting on the sales of cold food prepared for consumption.

Yesterday, we went to Winn Dixie to do some shopping. My mom selected a rotisserie chicken, and I selected a rotisserie chicken salad. The receipt from Winn Dixie is not itemized in the same manner as Corner Market, but I called Winn Dixie today to ask about how the tax is collected. I was informed that the nine percent tax is being collected on both deli items, without regard as to whether the prepared food is hot or cold. I couldn’t completely verify this today, since I was told that they would have to contact their corporate office for details. While I am expecting to hear back from Winn Dixie, my initial and quick audit of the receipt seems to confirm that a nine percent tax was collected for both deli items equally.

I was concerned abou[t] the response I received at my last address to the Council on the 15th of last April, and I was curious if the perversion of the tax described in response was merely similar to a tradition of perverted tax collection. I have been able to determine that even when we pervert the taxing authority of the municipality, whether or not the reason for the perversion is good or bad, we still cannot treat the taxpayers equally and collect uniformly from them. It seems that our convention promotion tax has been collected unfairly for almost thirty years now, and it is difficult to determine just how much lost revenue was lost due to these types of collection practices. While I can certainly understand that properly respecting the convention promotion tax would inevitably be perceived as unpopular if it were actually to be collected as equally and uniformly as levied and assessed, yet being dishonorable and dishonest about the truth of what is actually being taxed is far worse than attempting to be honest about an unpopular tax. Being honest and truthful abou the nature of a potentially unpopular tax provides the motive and opportunity for a people to fix the problem. Deceiving the public carries a different price. Will the city allow for the deceptive tax collections that favor some tax payers over others to continue unabated when being informed that their authority to tax is not being respected?

Sincerely,

Joseph Rawson"
